
{% include header.md %}

<!-- # Injecting date and time into a GitHub page with Jekyll -->

# Jekyll injection

## Adding date and time to a GitHub page

### 2021 Dec 31

It's a problem every developer has faced (it me, I'm every developer).  You make an earth-shattering edit to your blog on [GitHub pages](https://pages.github.com/){:target="blank"}, commit, push, and refresh your browser to see the changes.  But wait: are you looking at the edited page, or the old version?  You watch the page build [GitHub action](https://github.com/features/actions){:target="blank"} to confirm that it completed, but has the deployment trickled all the way down yet?

The only way to really know which version you're looking at is to add the build time or git revision somewhere on your page.  [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/){:target="blank"} even offers the variable `site.github.build_revision` [for the latter](https://github.com/jekyll/github-metadata/blob/master/docs/configuration.md){:target="blank"}.

We're going to look at a more flexible solution that can be extended to other automated page modifications, which will eventually look like this:

_Build: Fri Dec 31 01:03:45 UTC 2021, revision: `f7c5b70`_

Assuming I haven't broken anything, you can probably see it live at the bottom of this page.

The variables injected into the page will form part of the serum that transforms Jekyll's markdown into Hyde's html (or do I have those codeowners backwards?).

## Setup your template page source with variables to be replaced

In my example, I'm working on the `_layouts/default.html` page, where my footer is.  You can run the injection on `index.md` or any other `html` or `md` (markdown) translation unit.

We don't want the injection to modify our source code and we don't care about version control on the output of the injection process.  So, move your source file to a template that will be the source of truth:

{% highlight shell %}
mv _layouts/default.html _layouts/default-template.html
{% endhighlight %}

Make sure the template filename starts with `_` or `.` so that it is ignored by Jekyll.  We're good since `default.html` is already in the `_layouts` folder.  In the future, do all of your editing on the template file rather than the one that gets automatically modified.

Next, [add the content](https://github.com/JeffIrwin/JeffIrwin.github.io/blob/89f0290/_layouts/default-template.html#L94){:target="blank"} where you're going to inject variables into `default-template.html`:

{% highlight html %}
<p>Build: BUILD_DATE, revision: <code>BUILD_REVI</code></p>
{% endhighlight %}

The variable identifiers I have chosen are `BUILD_DATE` and `BUILD_REVI`.

Be careful that these identifiers don't appear elsewhere in your source where you want them to be literal and unmodified.  Perhaps add some [sigil](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sigil_(computer_programming)){:target="blank"} -- e.g. `$VARIABLE` -- as an extra guard against the dumb parsing that we're about to do.

## Use `sed` to search and replace the template variables and generate your page source

In this example, there are some handy `bash` and `git` commands to get the data that we want to inject.

First, copy the template source file to the output destination file to be injected.  Then inject the data with `sed`:

{% highlight shell %}
srce=_layouts/default-template.html
dest=_layouts/default.html
cp $srce $dest

export TZ='US/Eastern'
date=$(date)
revi=$(git rev-parse --short HEAD)

sed -i "s/BUILD\_DATE/$date/g" $dest
sed -i "s/BUILD\_REVI/$revi/g" $dest
{% endhighlight %}

Recall that the `var=$(command)` syntax saves the output of a bash command in a variable.  The syntax for replacing `search` with `replace` globally in a `file` is `sed -i "s/search/replace/g" file`.

The underscore `_` needs to be escaped in the search pattern like `\_`.

Setting the timezone `TZ` is optional, it will probably default to [UTC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_Universal_Time){:target="blank"} otherwise.

Short of sigils, we can get little a extra protection by only replacing whole words that match the search pattern, by marking the beginning and ending word boundaries with `\<` and `\>` respectively:

{% highlight shell %}
sed -i "s/\<BUILD\_DATE\>/$date/g" $dest
{% endhighlight %}

Alternatively, if you don't want to use `sed`, you could generate an entire footer file with `echo`, `cat`, etc.  For the [Jekyll cayman theme](https://github.com/pages-themes/cayman){:target="blank"}, the footer is part of `default.html`, so it seems easier to use `sed` instead of generating all of `default.html` from scratch.

## Build and deploy the page

Because we're modifying the page source after every commit, we can't use the default Jekyll GitHub pages workflow.  We need to use a [custom `jekyll.yml` workflow](https://github.com/JeffIrwin/JeffIrwin.github.io/blob/89f0290/.github/workflows/jekyll.yml){:target="blank"}.

After checking out the git repo and running `sed` as above, place these steps in the workflow `yml` to build and deploy the page:

{% highlight yml %}
- uses: actions/jekyll-build-pages@v1-beta

- name: Deploy to github pages
  uses: JeffIrwin/github-pages-deploy-action@4.1.8
  with:
    branch: main
    folder: .
{% endhighlight %}

Make sure to update the branch name that you're deploying from if it's not `main`.  Are you still naming branches `master` in 2022?  😩

I'm using [JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/deploy-to-github-pages){:target="blank"} to deploy.  To guard against a [left-pad fiasco](https://qz.com/646467/how-one-programmer-broke-the-internet-by-deleting-a-tiny-piece-of-code/){:target="blank"}, I forked it and used [`pgh` git helper](https://github.com/JeffIrwin/pgh){:target="blank"} to keep the fork up to date.

One downside of this non-default workflow is [all the junk bot commits](https://github.com/JeffIrwin/JeffIrwin.github.io/commit/37ff434518929afd3a0fef486d16eab1b3eab1c7){:target="blank"}.  If you can figure out how to get rid of them, kudos to you.  The default Jekyll workflow doesn't create junk commits like this, but its `yml` isn't accessible to edit and add the `sed` commands.

Make sure to `pull` the changes locally after each junk commit.  If you're like me, you'll frequently forget to `pull` and end up with even more junk commits to `merge` the remote changes.

[The full source for this site is here.](https://github.com/JeffIrwin/JeffIrwin.github.io/tree/89f0290){:target="blank"}

